---
title: Class 4
date: January 13, 2023
---

# Stochastic Process $\{ X(t), t\in T \}$
 
- $X(t) : \Omega \rightarrow \mathcal{S}$
- $T$ and $\mathcal{S}$ are parameter and state space respectively

# DTMC

- Obeys Markov Property

Consider Transition Probability Matrix

$$
P = \begin{pmatrix}
0.9 & 0.1 \\
0.1 & 0.9 
\end{pmatrix}
$$

Now if we consider $S_n = \sum X_i$ and $\hat{\mu}_n = S_n / n$ then $\hat{\mu}_n$ will depend on $P$ and might not go as expected from Strong Law of Large Numbers (SLLN).

- $\overline{\mu}$: Initial Distribution over $\mathcal{S}$

# Chapman Kolmogorov Equation for DTMC

- This follows only for homogeneous DTMCs
  - For non-homogeneous, $P$ depends on $n$ (the timestep).

$$P^{(n + l)} = P^{(n)} P^{(l)}$$

# Classification of States

## Accessible State

- $j$ is accessible from $i$ if $p^n_{ij} > 0$ for some $n$
- Denoted as $i \rightarrow j$
- $i \rightarrow j$ and $j \rightarrow i$ then we say that $i$ and $j$ communicate. This is denoted by $i \leftrightarrow j$.

***Communication*** is an equivalence relation.

$i \leftrightarrow i$ achieved in $P^0 = I$.

States which communicate belong to the same ***equivalence class***

## Irreducible

Irreducible when $i \leftrightarrow j, \ \forall i, j \in \mathcal{S}$ i.e., only one communicating class.

## Recurrent and Transient States

$$F_{ii} = P(\text{ever returning to } i \text{ having started in } i)$$

- State $i$ is recurrent if $F_{ii} = 1$
- If $F_{ii} < 1$ then State $i$ is transient
  - Each communicating class share recurrence or transience

# Limiting Probabilities

The dependence on initial distribution starts to vanish after long time.

$$
\pi_j = \lim_{n\rightarrow \infty} p^{(n)}_{ij} = [\lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} P^n]_{ij}
$$ 

# Stationary Distribution

$$
\pi = \pi P
$$
\begin{proof}
Stochastic Matrices always have an eigenvalue $1$, so stationary distribution will always exist.
\end{proof}

- $\pi P$ is essentially the pmf of $X_1$ having picked $X_0$ according to $\pi$
- $\pi = \pi P$ says that the distribution of $X_1$ will also be $\pi$ (if initial distribution was $\pi$)

\begin{remark}
If Limiting Distribution exists, then it is same as stationary distribution.
\end{remark}
